Serious complications can occur as a result of malpositioned lines and tubes in patients. Doctors and nurses frequently use checklists for placement of lifesaving equipment to ensure they follow protocol in managing patients. Yet, these steps can be time consuming and are still prone to human error, especially in stressful situations when hospitals are at capacity.

The gold standard for the confirmation of line and tube positions are chest radiographs. However, a physician or radiologist must manually check these chest x-rays to verify that the lines and tubes are in the optimal position. Not only does this leave room for human error, but delays are also common as radiologists can be busy reporting other scans. Deep learning algorithms may be able to automatically detect malpositioned catheters and lines. Once alerted, clinicians can reposition or remove them to avoid life-threatening complications.

The Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Radiologists (RANZCR) is a not-for-profit professional organisation for clinical radiologists and radiation oncologists in Australia, New Zealand, and Singapore. The group is one of many medical organisations around the world (including the NHS) that recognizes malpositioned tubes and lines as preventable. RANZCR is helping design safety systems where such errors will be caught.

In this competition, you’ll detect the presence and position of catheters and lines on chest x-rays. Use machine learning to train and test your model on 40,000 images to categorize a tube that is poorly placed.